# Earth's Orbit from Pulsar Signals 
This is a project I made on work experience that calculates the orbit of the earth based on residuals from pulsars J1614-2230 and J2222-0137. When ran, the project displays graphs about the timing of these pulsars and finally the orbit of the earth. This program uses pandas, matplotlib and numpy to calculate and plot these graphs.
## The Plots
### Delays vs Time
Four out of the six plots on this repository are of the pulsar residuals vs the time they are recorded. These roughly follow a sine curve that suggests that the earth's orbit is elliptical. There is one curve for each pulsar, and this is because the earth (when travelling in its elliptical orbit) will get at its closest point to one of the pulsars before moving to its closest point to the other pulsar. The fact that the separation of the two curves is about a quarter of the period also suggests an elliptical orbit.
### Earth's Orbit from Pulsar Timing Delays
This shows the orbit of the earth from these timing delays. By plotting the residuals of the pulsars against eachother rather than against time, you can calculate the orbit. This is equivalent to making a coordinate system from the timing delays, and calculating the orbit of the earth. The graph is in units of miliseconds (from the pulsar timing residuals), but can be translated into metres using the speed of light. 
### Velocity vs Time
This is an interesting graph, calculated by deriving the speed of the earth's orbit from its position. The speed changes because of gravity - the earth moves faster at the perihelion (when it's closest to the sun) and slower at the aphelion (when it's further away from the sun). This accounts for the general shape of the graph (how it goes up and down), but does not account for the smaller, sharper changes that happen as it accelerates from a slower speed to a higher speed. One of the challenges for this graph was calculating its speed in units of kilometres per second rather than drom the residuals.
## The Process
This is a project I created on work experience at OzGrav. This is a python program where I calculated the earth's orbit from pulsar residuals. This is an extension of other projects I'd done including retrieving data from the ATNF pulsar catalogue and visualising it. 

The first step was finding the data that we could use to make a project like this. For the data, I retrieved it from OzGrav's pulsar timing residuals and used the location to find pulsars that were located in the same plane as the orbit of the earth, and then two pulsars in this plane that were approximately 90 degrees away from each other. Choosing pulsars in these locations would mean that the orbit could be calculated by making a sort of coordinate system out of the delays in timing it took for these signals to reach earth.

After retrieving this data, I made a few basic plots of the delays in timing to get an understanding of how it looks and fits together. To convert this data to make the earth's orbit, I had to use a form of interpolation, because observations of different pulsars generally don't happen at the same. To account for this, I had to calculate the delays in pulsar signals that would be predicted to happen at a certain time, using first linear interpolation and then quadratic interpolation. I also further prepared the data by using trigonometry (because the pulsars were not precisely on the same plane as the earth), and setting the average of the data to equal zero so it could be plotted effectively.

Once the data had been cleaned, I plotted it and it showed the elliptical earth's orbit. From here I calculated the speed of the earth's orbit and attempted to create a graph that showed both the earth's position and speed (it turned out to be a messy graph that didn't reveal much about the data), and then made one that showed time of year vs the speed of the earth, which was a clear graph but it wasn't apparent why for some periods of the year it varied a lot in small bits of the overall larger pattern.

Overall, the work experience was so valuable, and I learnt so much across coding, maths and astrophysics. I became much better at using pandas and matplotlib to work with data, but I also improved my scientific and critical thinking about testing different theories about patterns in the data, and my data analysis skills in general.
